# **FinTech Meets GovTech**
## A Case Study About a Government Financial Innovation
---
## *Overview and Origin*
PayIt was founded in 2013 by John Thomson, CEO and Michael Plunkett, COO in Kansas City Missouri. The idea for PayIt came about when Thomson went online to make a payment to renew his vehicle registration at the DMV. He was unable to make the transaction on their outdated website and found himself waiting in line at a DMV location. In an interview he said, 
>*“This should be different. It should be more modern, more convenient, more connected, more proactive. There should just be less friction when doing business with government.”*

He says that he thought about how the burden of figuring everything out is on the citizen, and he wanted to create a solution to make the citizen more connected to government. After meeting with 8 governors in twenty four hours, Thompson knew he had an idea that was welcomed by politicians. With the promise of a better DMV experience, they gained a lot of support from investors, even increasing their initial, startup funding goal. They raised over $104 million with most coming from a single investor, Insight Venture Partners.
## *Business Activities*
PayIt is filling a niche in bringing fintech solutions to general government activities from local to state. The company offers a variety of payment solutions through their website and app portal. By storing customer information, PayIt is able to give customers the ease and efficiency of making payments anywhere with an internet connection. They also offer an online chat feature to help customers through the entire process. From County property taxes to licensure services to motor vehicle payments, customers can make payments without the hassle of standing in line or even leaving their home. 
Customers include the general public in the United States with plans to expand internationally. As of September 2020, they have a new headquarters in Canada. It is estimated that $2 trillion is exchanged in government activities with the public per year.

As an advantage over competitors, they offer a secure platform to interact with different forms of government. Customer information is stored on the cloud to make payments across services and governments more efficient. Customers do not need to enter their information each time they make a payment. Unlike most of their competitors, they specialize in only working with government and therefore, better understand the needs of their customers in expanding and refining their products.

PayIt uses the AWS GovCloud to store user’s information securely in what they like to call a “wallet.” Customers enter personal and payment information in a profile and in turn, the agency provides digital copies of driver’s licenses, vehicle registrations and other information. By having access to a "wallet" of information, customers will never be left without a certain type of documentation. Customers can make multiple types of payments at their fingertips and the platform provides a transaction history. Other smart features of the service is that it gives suggestions for other types of licences or permits during the process and can send reminders when licenses or permits need to be renewed. For example, when applying for a park pass, the app may ask if you also would like to purchase a fishing permit. 
## *Landscape*
PayIt is in a unique position between the overlapping realms of FinTech and GovTech. Within FinTech, PayIt fits into the billing and payments domain. Online billing and payments have been a rapidly evolving domain in the past ten years. Payment technologies are being developed by mobile phone companies, banks, credit card companies, other innovative apps and even social media platforms. Several cell phone companies such as Apple and Google created a wallet for mobile payments and records allowing the easy purchase and storage of plane or concert tickets. Online and mobile payments have become more and more secure with the use of multi-factor authentication and the newest method, biometric authentication. Automatic payments from household bills to person to person, have become easy and a part of daily life. Although there are many established and successful payment platforms that work with government services, such as Aliant, Stripe, PayPal, Visa and sometimes other self-made technologies from governments in this domain, PayIt solely focuses on GovTech and the regulations, requirements, mandates and citizen concerns that come with working with the government.
## *Results*
PayIt is interrupting the way government does business and how it interacts with its citizens giving citizens a faster, pleasant, helpful and more efficient experience. Companies in this domain use several core metrics to measure success. One of these key performance measures is the total payment volume which gives the total value of transactions completed within a given amount of time. Another simpler way to calculate this metric is to add the total amount of money processed by the company. Though, some companies may regard the total number of transactions more valuable when first gaining traction. The second metric often used is the total active customer accounts. This measure is used differently among established versus newer organizations. Newer organizations might find app downloads per month to be more valuable when starting out. The last measure commonly used by payment companies is the number of payment transactions per active account.

Although, PayIt has won multiple awards in GovTech, including the top 100 in GovTech for the past 4 years, it is hard to determine how PayIt is doing relative to competitors in this domain. One of the primary reason is that other companies are not limited to providing services for government. The number of payment companies focused solely on government is very limited as government is a often a difficult market to tap into. Payit, though, has pushed their way into this sector by targeting organizations known for their use and recognition of innovation. Several of the local and state agencies using PayIt have also won awards for their innovation in payments. The fact that the startup had so much interest from investors at such an early phase is promising. PayIt has been pretty secretive in hiding their share of the business from competitors. Compared to other companies in this domain, PayIt is still young and has a lot of room for growth and expansion in the government sector.
## *Recommendations*
I would suggest this company expand into different areas and functions of government, especially internal processes. Understanding the internal processes of government can help to refine the external offerings. This service would help increase efficiency and security within finance departments of government. There are so many requirements in government with cash handling and other processes that make simple actions slow. If PayIt could develop services to function as the finance department to collect and record payments across departments, there would be a lot more accountability for how money is collected and deposited. They could also manage the way money is budgeted, managed and invested.

One way to make this new beneficial service possible would be to use block chain. This company could use block chain to help with certain types of requirements and bureaucratic processes. One example is that certain types of financial processes require signatures from multiple levels of management to proceed often slowing down the transaction for up to a week or longer. Block chain would allow the process to run smoothly as every step of the process would be automaticly recorded as soon as the approver makes the click. Another example is licensing across agencies that need signatures back and forth across organizations. A person could pay for a permitting service in one location on the PayIt app and block chain would make it possible to get approval from the city and county and distribute the payments to each. The customer would only need to make a selection for the type of permits and make the payment in one place while PayIt would do all of the background work to record approvals.
### Addendum
[TechCrunch: PayIt, a payments platform designed for public services, raises $100M+ from Insight Partners](https://techcrunch.com/2019/03/28/payit-a-payments-platform-designed-for-public-services-raises-100m-from-insight-partners/)

[CrunchBase Organization Profile](https://www.crunchbase.com/organization/payit)

[PayItgov.com](https://payitgov.com/about-us/)

[Payment Methods: A Brief History and a Look to the Future](https://www.cardknox.com/white-papers/payment-methods-history-and-future/)

[What’s trending in the world of faster and instant payments?](https://www.frbservices.org/financial-services/fednow/trending-world-faster-instant-payments.html)

[PayIt: Missouri Most Funded Tech Startup](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=z9fmgG9EjbY&t=320s)

[Key Metrics: How PayPal Boosts Transaction Volume](https://www.fool.com/investing/general/2016/03/28/key-metrics-how-paypal-boosts-transaction-volume.aspx)